[New concept]: Binary, Octal, Hexdecimal (#3307)
exercism/python: concepts/binary-octal-hexadecimal/about.md

If we write `0b10011`, Python will interpret it as a binary number and convert it to base 10.

```python
# 0b10011
>>> 0b10011
19

>>> type(0b10011)
<class 'int'>
```

Binary in Python is just a different way of writing an integer and so the binary representation **is an integer** for all mathematical operations.

If you write a number with a `0b` prefix that is not in the binary system, it will raise a `SyntaxError`.

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "c:\binary.py", line 1, in <module>
    0b10211
SyntaxError: invalid digit '2' in binary literal
```

### Operations with Binary Numbers

Since binary numbers are integers, we can perform all operations on them that we can with integers.

```python
# addition
>>> 0b10011 + 0b10011
38

# multiplication
>>> 0b10011 * 0b10011
361
```

We can also perform operations between both binary and integer representations.
However, the usual mathematical operator rules apply:  dividing two binary numbers or integer numbers will return a `float`, even if the division does not result in a decimal portion.

```python
>>> 0b10011 + 19
38

>>> 0b10011/0b10011
1.0

>>> 0b10011/3

> 6.333333333333333
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6.333333333333333
```
```

`bin()` will return a `str` of the binary equivalent with the prefix `0b` .

```python
>>> bin(19)
'0b10011'
```

To convert a binary literal to an integer, we can use the built-in `int()` function, and pass a string of the binary representation and a base argument:

```python
>>> int("0b10011", 2)
19
```

Giving the wrong base (_or an invalid binary representation_) will raise a `ValueError`:

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "c:\binary.py", line 4, in <module>
    int("0b10011", 3)
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 3: '0b10011'
```

### Binary Methods

There are also some special [methods][numeral-systems] that we can use on binary numbers.

[`<int>.bit_length()`][bit_length] will return the number of bits that are needed to represent the number:

```python
>>> 0b11011.bit_length()
5
```

[`<int>.bit_count()`][bit_count] will return the number of **ones** in the binary number.
For example, `bit_count()` on '0b11011' will return 4:

```python
>>> 0b11011.bit_count()
4

~~~~exercism/note
If you are working locally, `bit_count()` requires at least Python 3.10.
The Exercism online editor currently supports all features through Python 3.11.
~~~~ 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

Prefixing a number with `0o` that is not in the octal system will raise a `SyntaxError`.

 ### Converting to and from Octal Representation
 

To convert an `int` into an octal representation, you can use the built-in [`oct()`][oct] function.
This acts similarly to the `bin()` function, returning a string:

```python
>>> oct(83)
'0o123'

To convert an octal number to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, passing an octal string representation and the base (8) as arguments:

```python
>>> int("0o123", 8)
83
```

As with binary, giving the wrong base will raise a `ValueError`.

### Hexadecimal

[Hexadecimal][hexadecimal] is a base 16 numeral system.
It uses the digits 0 - 9 and the letters A, B, C, D, E, and F.
A is 10, B is 11, C is 12, D is 13, E is 14, and F is 15.

We can represent hexadecimal numbers in Python using the `0x` prefix.
As with binary and octal, Python will automatically convert hexadecimal literals to `int`.

```python
# 0x123
>>> 0x123
291
```

As with binary and octal - hexidecimal literals **are ints**, and you can perform all integer operations.  
Prefixing a non-hexidecimal number with `0x` will raise a `SyntaxError`.

> ### Representing hexadecimal numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> # binary, octal, hexadecimal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Binary, Octal, Hexadecimal
```

Binary, octal, and hexadecimal (_also known as hex_) are different [numeral systems][numeral-systems] with different bases.
Binary is base 2, octal is base 8, and hexadecimal is base 16.
Normal integers are base 10 in python.

> Binary, octal, and hexadecimal are all a subset of integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary, octal, and hexadecimal are all representations of integers.
```

> Which means that they can only represent whole numbers and support all the operations that we can do with integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which means that they represent positive and negative numbers (_including zero_) without fractions or decimals.
```

## Binary

> [Binary][binary] is a base 2 numeral system.
> The most common numeral system is base 10.
> In the base 10 numeral system so are the digits: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
> Binary is base 2, so the digits are 0 and 1.
> It is used to represent the on and off states of a computer.
> Binary can create all the numbers that we use in base 10.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Binary][binary] is a base 2 numeral system, using only the digits 0 and 1.
It commonly represents the 0 ("off") and 1 ("on") states of electrical flow through transistors and switches in computers, as well as the positive and negative charges in magnetic storage media.
Binary can represent all the integers that are used in base 10.
```

A snippet from the base 2 system looks like this, although it continues infinitely and doesn't stop at 128:

| 128      | 64       | 32       | 16       | 8        | 4        | 2        | 1        |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| 2 \*\* 7 | 2 \*\* 6 | 2 \*\* 5 | 2 \*\* 4 | 2 \*\* 3 | 2 \*\* 2 | 2 \*\* 1 | 2 \*\* 0 |

So if we want to represent the number 6, it would in binary be: 110

| Place value   | 4   | 2   | 1   |
| ------------- | --- | --- | --- |
| Binary number | 1   | 1   | 0   |

And the operation would be: `4 + 2 + 0 = 6`

Another example: 19

| Place value   | 16  | 8   | 4   | 2   | 1   |
| ------------- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Binary number | 1   | 0   | 0   | 1   | 1   |

The binary number would be: 10011
And the operation would be: `16 + 0 + 0 + 2 + 1 = 19`

## Binary in Python

> In Python, we can represent binary numbers using the `0b` prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Python, we can represent binary literals using the `0b` prefix.
```

If we write `0b10011`, Python will interpret it as a binary number and convert it to base 10.

```python
# 0b10011
>>> 0b10011
19

>>> type(0b10011)
<class 'int'>
```

> Binary in python is a subset of integers, therefore it will act like an integer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Binary in Python is a different way of writing an integer and so the binary representation will act as an integer for all mathematical operations that do not return a `float` or `complex` number.
```

> If you have a number which is not in the binary system, it will raise a `SyntaxError`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you write a number which is not in the binary system, it will raise a `SyntaxError`.
```

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "c:\binary.py", line 1, in <module>
    0b10211
SyntaxError: invalid digit '2' in binary literal
```

> ### Operations with binary numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Operations with Binary Numbers
```

> Since binary is a subset of integers, we can do all the operations that we can do with integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since binary numbers are integers, we can perform all operations on them that we can with integers.
```

```python
# addition
>>> 0b10011 + 0b10011
38

# multiplication
>>> 0b10011 * 0b10011
361
```

> We can do also have operations with both integers and binary numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also perform operations between both binary and integer representations.
```

> ```python
> >>> 0b10011 + 19
> 38
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
>>> 0b10011 + 19
38

>>> 0b10011/0b10011
1.0

>>> 0b10011/3
6.333333333333333
```
```

> ### Representing binary numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Converting to and from Binary Representation
```

> Since python will automatically convert binary to `int`, do we have to use the `bin()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python will automatically convert a binary literal into `int`.
 To convert an `int` into a binary representation, use the `bin()` function.
```

> If we want to represent a binary number.
> `bin()` will return a `string` with the prefix `0b`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the built-in function [`bin()`][bin] will return a `str` with the prefix `0b`.
```

```python

> >>> bin(0b10011)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>>> bin(19)
```

'0b10011'
```

> To convert a binary number to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, and pass a string with a binary and the base as arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert a binary literal to an integer, we can use the built-in `int()` function, and pass a string of the binary representation and a base argument:
```

```python
>>> int("0b10011", 2)
19
```

> Giving the wrong base will raise a `ValueError`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Giving the wrong base (_or an invalid binary representation_) will raise a `ValueError`:
```

```python
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "c:\binary.py", line 4, in <module>
    int("0b10011", 3)
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 3: '0b10011'
```

> ### Converting int to binary
> 
> We can also convert an integer to binary using the `bin()` function.
> 
> ```python
> # 0b10011
> >>> bin(19)
> '0b10011'
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I think we can fold this into the section above for brevity.

> ### Binary methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Binary Methods
```

> There are also [methods][numeral-systems] that we can use on binary numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also some special [methods][numeral-systems] that we can use on binary numbers.
```

> #### `<int>.bit_length()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> `<int>.bit_length()` will return the number of bits that are needed to represent the number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<int>.bit_length()` will return the number of bits that are needed to represent the number:
```

> So for example `0b10011` will return 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```python
>>> 0b11011.bit_length()
5
```

> #### `<int>.count()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```exercism/note
> `<bin>.count()` requires Python 3.10+.
> If you are using the online editor then you don't need to worry about this.
> ```
> 
> `<int>.bit_count()` will return the number of **ones** in the binary number.
> So for example `bit_count` will return 3.
> 
> ```python
> >>> 0b11011.bit_count()
> 4
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`<int>.bit_count()`][bit_count] will return the number of **ones** in the binary number.
For example, `bit_count()` on '0b11011' will return 4:

```python
>>> 0b11011.bit_count()
4
```
<br>

~~~~exercism/note
If you are working locally, `<bin>.count()` requires at least Python 3.10.
The Exercism online editor currently supports all features through Python 3.11.
~~~~
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

~~~~exercism/note
If you are working locally, `bit_count()` requires at least Python 3.10.
The Exercism online editor currently supports all features through Python 3.11.
~~~~ 

```

## Octal

[Octal][octal] is a base 8 numeral system.

> Meaning that the digits are: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7.
```

> In python, we can represent octal numbers using the `0o` prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Python, we can represent octal numbers using the `0o` prefix.
```

> As with binary, python will automatically convert octal to int.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with binary, Python automatically converts an octal representation to an `int`.
```

```python
# 0o123
>>> 0o123
83
```

> As with binary you can do all the operations that you can do with integers and giving a number which is not in the octal system will raise a `SyntaxError`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with binary, octal numbers **are ints** and support all integer operations.
Prefixing a number with `0o` that is not in the octal system will raise a `SyntaxError`.
```

> ### Representing octal numbers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To represent an octal number, we can use the `oct()` function.
> 
> ```python
> >>> oct(0o123)
> '0o123'
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To convert an octal number to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, pass a string with a octal and the base as arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert an octal number to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, passing an octal string representation and the base (8) as arguments:
```

```python
>>> int("0o123", 8)
83
```

As with binary, giving the wrong base will raise a `ValueError`.

> ### Converting int to octal
> 
> We can also convert an integer to binary using the `oct()` function.
> 
> ```python
> >>> oct(83)
> '0o123'
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ### hexadecimal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Hexadecimal
```

[Hexadecimal][hexadecimal] is a base 16 numeral system.

> Meaning that the digits are 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, F.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses the digits 0 - 9 and the letters A, B, C, D, E, and F.
```

> A is 10, B is 11, C is 12, D is 13, E is 14, F is 15.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A is 10, B is 11, C is 12, D is 13, E is 14, and F is 15.
```

> In python, we can represent hexadecimal numbers using the `0x` prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can represent hexadecimal numbers in Python using the `0x` prefix.
```

> As with binary and octal, python will automatically convert hexadecimal to int.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with binary and octal, Python will automatically convert hexadecimal literals to `int`.
```

```python

> # 0o123

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# 0x123
```

>>> 0x123
291
```

> As with binary and octal you can do all the operations that you can do with integers and giving a number which is not in the hex system will raise a `SyntaxError`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with binary and octal - hexidecimal literals **are ints**, and you can perform all integer operations.  
Prefixing a non-hexidecimal number with `0x` will raise a `SyntaxError`.
```

### Representing hexadecimal numbers

> To represent an hexadecimal number, we can use the `hex()` function.
> 
> ```python
> >>> hex(0x123)
> '0x123'
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert an `int` into a hexadecimal representation, you can use the built-in [`hex()`][hex] function.
This acts similarly to the `bin()` function, returning a string:

```python
>>> hex(291)
'0x123'
```
```

> To convert an hexadecimal number to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, pass a string with a hexadecimal and the base as arguments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To convert a hexadecimal representation to an integer, we can use the `int()` function, passing a hexadecimal string with the base (16) as arguments:
```

```python
>>> int("0x123", 16)
291
```

As with binary and octal, giving the wrong base will raise a `ValueError`.

> ### Converting int to hexadecimal
> 
> We can also convert an integer to binary using the `hex()` function.
> 
> ```python
> >>> hex(291)
> '0x123'
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> [binary]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[binary]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_number
[bit_count]:  https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#int.bit_count
[bit_length]: https://docs.python.org/3/library/stdtypes.html#int.bit_length
```
